---
layout: post
title:  "Artificial Intelligence or Machine Learning"
author: parav
categories: [ Basics ]
image: assets/images/ai-or-ml.jpg
---
Artificial Intelligence(AI) or Machine Learning(ML)? You have heard both the terms over and over again in the past few years (well, unless you've been living under a rock). You might have also noticed that people tend to use these terms interchangeably, which, in most cases, is erroneous.

Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence. This means any application of ML is AI but not the other way around. Squares and rectangles.

In this post, I'll discuss some applications of each, and hopefully, clear the distinction a bit more.

## Artificial Intelligence

From [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence):  
>"... the term "artificial intelligence" is often used to describe machines  (or computers) that mimic "cognitive" functions that humans associate  with the human mind, such as "learning" and "problem solving"."

One can search around the internet and find multiple academic sources defining AI. Why do the have to use such complicated words and phrasings? Anyways, broadly, AI is a computer simulating human intelligence. This simulation can take a lot of forms - pre-programmed actions to decision making.

### Subsets of AI

One way of classifying the branches of AI is to match them to the human intelligence components. We already know Machine Learning is one. Here are some of the others:

- **Problem solving** - Answering questions based on pre-programmed information or knowledge.
- **Natural language processing(NLP)** - This broadly means reading and  understanding human language. NLP techniques include a wide variety of tasks ranging from matching related keywords in a web search to inferring subjective  information about an individual through sentiment analysis.
- **Decision Making** - Presented with some information about a situation, specifying the correct course of action.
- **Planning** - Similar to decision making. Developing a strategy to reach a particular goal when presented with the facts about a situation.
- **Movement** - Navigation through an environment.
- **Pattern recognition** - Recognizing patterns, most often used in images or audio.

### Applications of AI

Artificial intelligence is being used in everyday life in technological systems that we all interact with everyday. From the Alexas to the Netflixes, major tech companies come up with new applications of AI every day. Here are some of the examples:

- **Translation** - Whether it is modules like text-to-speech, or translation from one language to another, this application of NLP is the result of machines interacting with human languages.
- **Games** - The classical applications are in beating Chess champions, but AI is also used in games to redirect the behavior of NPCs (non-playing characters) in response to the action of the player.
- **Computer vision** - This is an application of pattern recognition. These programs are able to use real-time input from cameras in the form of images and videos to detect object, label things and notify if something is amiss, as used in security cameras.
- **Sentiment analysis** - These programs infer information about the individual through their writing. This can be used in a wide variety of applications ranging from a customer service context to finding certain things about the person.
- **Algorithmic trading** - Financial trading using AI allows to make trading decisions at speeds several orders of magnitudes greater than any human is capable of, often making millions of trades in a day  without any human intervention.
- **Heavy Industry** - Robots have  become common in many industries and are often given jobs that are  considered dangerous to humans. Robots have proven effective in jobs  that are very repetitive which may lead to mistakes or accidents due to a lapse in concentration and other jobs that humans may find degrading.

## Machine Learning

Machine learning is a subset of AI in which the machine or the algorithm learns dynamically through experience. This can be data collected previously, or even real-time stimulus. The programs can modify themselves and improve their predictions or  task executions without human intervention when exposed to new data.

### How do machine learning algorithms learn?

The process of learning begins with observations or data, such as  examples, direct experience, or instruction, in order to look for  patterns in data and make better decisions in the future based on the  examples that we provide. The primary aim is to allow the computers learn automatically without human intervention or assistance and adjust actions accordingly. Ultimately, the ideal machine learning model receives as  little correction as possible.

### How is machine learning used in industry?

Here are some examples of how machine learning models are used in different industries:

#### **Finance**

- **Fraud detection** –  Machine learning models constantly watch and  assess customer behavior and quickly send out an alert when suspicious activity is detected. For example: **Paypal** is using ML for protection against money laundering. The company uses a set of tools that helps them to compare millions of  transactions taking place and distinguish between legitimate or  illegitimate transactions taking place between the buyers and sellers.
- **Credit scoring** – Traditional credit scoring models are typically rules-based systems,  but in more recent years machine learning models have been used to  incorporate additional types of borrower behaviors.

#### **Healthcare**

- **Disease detection** – Many healthcare providers are using computer vision models to aid in the detection of diseases like cancers.

#### **Entertainment**

- **Recommender systems** – On the basis of your behaviour with a website/app, past purchases,  items liked or added to cart, brand preferences etc., the application can make product  recommendations. This also includes streaming services like Netflix and Spotify.
- **Search Engine Results** - Google and other search engines use machine learning to improve the search results. Every time a query is executed, the algorithm keeps track of user response.

#### **E-commerce**

- **Dynamic pricing** – Machine learning models can help sellers predict a shopper’s  willingness to pay a specific price for an item. Retailers are often  able to make sales that they would have otherwise lost but just  adjusting the price slightly.
- **Web page personalization** – Page layout can influence an individual’s likelihood to buy.  Personalized site models are often based on previous shopping history  along with how the shopper interacted with the website in the past.

## So, artificial intelligence or machine learning?

It doesn’t make much sense to compare a discipline and a subset of the discipline. One  could argue however that machine learning is possibly the future of AI,  as much of the current research in the field is focused on this  particular area.
